propose: js active conn mgr (#81)
protocol/web3-dev-team: proposals/js-connection-manager.md

Good project scope aims for ~3-5 engineers for 1-3 months (though feel free to suggest larger-scoped projects anyway). 
Projects do not include regular day-to-day maintenance and improvement work, e.g. on testing, tooling, validation, code clarity, refactors for future capability, etc.
-->
<!--
For ease of discussion in PRs, consider breaking lines after every sentence or long phrase.
-->

## Purpose &amp; impact 
#### Background &amp; intent
_Describe the desired state of the world after this project? Why does that matter?_
<!--
Outline the status quo, including any relevant context on the problem you’re seeing that this project should solve. Wherever possible, include pains or problems that you’ve seen users experience to help motivate why solving this problem works towards top-line objectives. 
-->

With the existing protocols in libp2p, as well as IPFS subsystems built on top of libp2p, such as Pubsub and the DHT, the need for a connection manager overhaul becomes an import work stream, so that these protocols operate as expected by the users, i.e. out of the box solution.

> Currently, js nodes have a reactive connection manager that can be decoupled into two parts: establishing new connections and trimming connections. The former relies on an `autoDial` approach, where each time a new node is discovered it will try to establish a connection with that peer. The later consists on blindly trimming connections when reaching a configurable threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, js nodes have a reactive connection manager that can be decoupled into two parts: establishing new connections and trimming connections. The former relies on an `autoDial` approach, where each time a new node is discovered it will try to establish a connection with that peer, if it has less connections than its desired minimum. The latter consists on blindly trimming connections when reaching a configurable threshold.
```

> Currently, js nodes have a reactive connection manager that can be decoupled into two parts: establishing new connections and trimming connections. The former relies on an `autoDial` approach, where each time a new node is discovered it will try to establish a connection with that peer, if it has less connections than its desired minimum. The latter consists on blindly trimming connections when reaching a configurable threshold.

Reviewer 2: Why auto-dial? This seems weird.

In go-ipfs, the DHT will find new nodes when its routing table drops too low, but there's no reason to stay connected to some minimum number of nodes otherwise.

Author: IIRC, the `auto-dial` appeared as a temporary solution for making things magically working when relying on webrtc-star. This is the current default on js-libp2p to proactively establish connections.

This means, peers would discover other peers via the webrtc-star and would create a silo network where subsystems like pubsub would just work. Behind the scenes, what libp2p does is simply every time a new peer is discovered, it will attempt to dial it (if within the connMgr threshold).

> In go-ipfs, the DHT will find new nodes when its routing table drops too low, but there's no reason to stay connected to some minimum number of nodes otherwise.

It is a requirement to stay connected to a minimum number of nodes to have a reliable gossipsub overlay. In addition, I think go also keeps connections with its closest peers. In JS, it is also essential to guarantee that a node is connected to a set of relays (specially in the browser) to be reachable via other nodes. Then there are dapp use cases, such as Slate, where it is desirable to be connected to other nodes in the dapp context

From the current solution, there is a lot of space for improvement with tremendous value for the users. Either evolving the current connection manager to the state of the go-implementation or implementing a fully fledged [Connection Manager v2](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/161) (+ [more notes](https://github.com/libp2p/notes/issues/13)).

> With the connection manager overhaul in JS we aim to:

Reviewer 2: I'd distinguish between connection management as in "managing/closing existing connections" and "peer/service discovery". This proposal currently discusses both but they're pretty separate issues.

Author: > Unless I'm seriously misunderstanding this proposal, this isn't the right approach.

Probably the misunderstanding with the proposal comes from this. You are probably right that the connection manager should be essentially responsible for "managing/closing existing connections".  However, the role of `peer/service discovery` in my mind is as simple as discovering a given peer (with its announced multiaddrs) and store them in the PeerStore. This also relates on how the peer discovery interface is defined (I think this also is the case in go?).

After adding to the PeerStore, another libp2p "component" should act to figure out if we should try to connect to this peer or not, taking into account the topologies needs as well as the general needs of libp2p, such as relays...

> This proposal currently discusses both but they're pretty separate issues.

I think this is the gap here. I am seeing the connection manager to be responsible for two main things:
- Proactively establishing connections
- Trimming connections

Proactively establishing connections is divided into two other things:
- Act on peer discovery
- Trigger peer discovery per needs (pubsub topics, relays, etc)

So, we essentially need to have this entity who is responsible to act as an orchestrator by leveraging Peer Discovery + Peer Store to fulfil the needs of topologies + libp2p. I see some overlap in this entity with the connection manager, such as decisions on wether we should close a connection in favour of establishing a connection with a peer that has more value for the node's needs, as well as to free connections that are not needed in the long run (like bootstrap nodes).

> One way to solve this is some form of service where you can say "I need to be connected to X-Y peers that provide X (content, pubsub topic, etc.)" and this service is responsible for forming and maintaining those connections. But, my experience, it's rarely that simple. Usually, every service will need to manage its peers (e.g., because some peers might not actually offer the services they claim to offer, etc.).

Libp2p topology is probably the service we are talking here. I agree that it is a simpler option to just let services be responsible for forming the connections. However, this also has some implications that should be considered if we want to create a libp2p spec out of this. On top of my mind, we will not take efficient decisions and try to leverage connections that offer us more (decide between a peer running pubsub or a peer running pubsub + part of the dapp context), a peer part of more than one topology will be counted several times and make better decisions when trimming connections.

There is the [Connection Overhaul Issue libp2p/js-libp2p#744](https://github.com/libp2p/js-libp2p/issues/744) with a lot of information on how this would work, as well as an initial draft on how each component would interact. It is a pretty extensive issue, but perhaps it is worth reading.

Let me know what you think, if we can get to a better place to have this logic than the connection manager it might be good to separate the logic between proactive connections vs trimming. But, I overall think there will be overlap on the decision making logic.

> - Find our closest peers on the network, and attempt to stay connected to n to them

Reviewer 3: Closest in terms of geography, ping latency or Kademlia XOR distance?

> - Find our closest peers on the network, and attempt to stay connected to n to them

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Find our closest peers on the network, and attempt to stay connected to n of them
```

Not a native speaker. Feel free to ignore.

> - Find our closest peers on the network, and attempt to stay connected to n of them

Reviewer 2: Closest as in DHT, distance, local network?

Author: Kademlia distance, more in https://github.com/protocol/web3-dev-team/pull/81#discussion_r596826388

> - Finding, connecting to and protecting our gossipsub peers (same topics search)

Reviewer 2: Does gossipsub have peer exchange yet?

Author: It has, but disabled by default. Anyway, the point here is mostly regarding the initial bootstrap of the pubsub overlay

> - Finding and binding to relays with AutoRelay

Reviewer 2: go-libp2p now has a list of known-good "relays". We've found that random relays on the network just don't behave well enough to be useful.

> - Finding and binding to application protocol peers (as needed via MulticodecTopology) -- We should clarify what libp2p will handle intrinsically and what users need to do

Reviewer 2: Could you expand on this?

Author: in `js-libp2p`, we have introduced the concept of [Topologies](https://github.com/libp2p/js-libp2p-interfaces/tree/master/src/topology). It has some thoughts from https://github.com/libp2p/notes/issues/13  

In summary what happens is:
- Pubsub, DHT and any other libp2p protocol/subsystem can register themselves as a topology in libp2p registrar
- Once a connection is established, identify protocol kicks in and running protocols of the peer are stored in the ProtoBook
- When a peer is added to the protoBook, a topology callback is called and we verify if that peer is running the topology protocol. If so, for instance pubsub subsystem is notified and it can open a pubsub stream from that connection

If a dapp creates a protocol (let's consider Slate example again), they will likely want to have a Slate topology where once a new peer in slate is running they can be notified and establish an "application overlay". Another thing to consider here would be the concept of `MetadataTopology` together with `MulticodecTopology` as we should be able to create topologies per metadata as well to enable some scenarios. 

Note that the topology receives a `minPeer`, `maxPeer` but we are not using them yet. This is related to the goal of this proposal. The idea here is to inform libp2p of the requirements of the topology in terms of numbers of needed peers to operate reliably. With this, libp2p can act to fulfil the needs of each requirements and properly manage the connections that are needed.

All the above scenarios need proper setups from our users at the moment, which means they need to manually find the nodes they want to connect and connect to them, as libp2p connection manager will not be actively looking at meaningful connection to establish.

An active connection manager will enable out of the box creation of meaningful overlay networks, as well as enable browser nodes to bind to AutoRelay nodes, so that they can be dialed from other nodes in the network. Moreover, JS nodes keep the discovered peers stored in the PeerStore. On subsequent node starts, these nodes should prioritize their previous established topology over the bootstrap nodes if possible.

#### Assumptions &amp; hypotheses
_What must be true for this project to matter?_
<!--(bullet list)-->

> - Web3 developers want to have a reliable pubsub topology out of the box without relying on star servers

Reviewer 4: @vasco-santos @aschmahmann @jacobheun can you help flesh this one out a little more (here in comments is probably fine)?

What can we assert today about the demand for solid pubsub in the browser? Do we have good use-cases that we know users are attempting to rely on today? And what signals (maybe in the form of possible use-cases they are/have been attempting to use) should we be looking for when talking to users to back up this assumption?

Author: @jacobheun I think you are focused on the flows after we have the connections. The first step should be to have an active connection manager to replace our current `autoDial` approach. 

The connection manager should actively:
- trigger peer discovery mechanisms for peers of interest
  - if they run pubsub, trigger a discovery query for peers with same subscriptions and establish a connection
  - trigger queries to closest peers to establish connections
  - ...
- on restart check PeerStore to establish a meaningful set of connections

After the connection manager is able to actively establish important connection rather than let's connect every peer discovered unless we already have too many connections, the second part would be the trimming scope

> - Web3 developers want to find and connect to other peers in a given scope

Reviewer: Is this related to connection gating? This sounds like it's trying to account for discovery mechanisms which would be out of scope for this. Being able to restrict who I am connecting to/is connecting to me would be in this scope though. Although it could be done as a separate piece of work. Priority here being:

1. Get me more connections to peers so I can effectively use the network (JS is currently weak here, especially in browser)
2. Allow me to prioritize connections to optimize my resources (tagging)
3. Allow me to restrict outbound/inbound connections based on definable criteria (custom connection gaters for allow/deny listing)

Author: related to: https://github.com/protocol/web3-dev-team/pull/81#discussion_r603925131

> - Browser developers want to have their nodes reachable via more transports than `webrtcSTAR` out of the box

Reviewer: I don't think this fits here, how does this apply to connection management?

Author: Not sure what I was trying to get from this, so I will remove it for now

> - PL wants to decrease the load on bootstrap nodes

Reviewer: We should clarify this a bit. The goal here is that once a node performs an initial query to discover its closest peers, it should no longer need to rely on the Bootstrap nodes unless all other nodes it knows go offline. They're of little value outside of joining the network and initial discovery (unless they happen to be a closest peer to us).

```suggestion
- Reduce the reliance nodes have on Bootstrap nodes outside of joining the network, to reduce the load on those servers
```

<!--Briefly describe the milestones/steps/work needed for this project-->

There is a proposal already for a [full connection manager overhaul](https://github.com/libp2p/js-libp2p/issues/744). There are a few items that should not be considered into this scope. Connection Gating, Retries and Disconnect are good candidates for a follow up proposal. Decaying tags might have their value, but depend on how far we aim to reach as a first step. Proactive dial, Trim connections, Keep Alive and being able to protect important connections are essential for the scope of this proposal.

#### What does done look like?
_What specific deliverables should completed to consider this project done?_

####  What does success look like?
_Success means impact. How will we know we did the right thing?_

<!--
Provide success criteria. These might include particular metrics, desired changes in the types of bug reports being filed, desired changes in qualitative user feedback (measured via surveys, etc), etc.
-->

#### Counterpoints &amp; pre-mortem
_Why might this project be lower impact than expected? How could this project fail to complete, or fail to be successful?_

#### Alternatives

> _How might this project’s intent be realized in other ways (other than this project proposal)? What other potential solutions can address the same need?_

Reviewer: Alternatives is probably not the best place for this, but as prior art/previous discussions here are some previous notes on a topology/mesh approach to connection management https://github.com/libp2p/notes/issues/13. Tagging is likely simpler.

Author: This is more a question of solution design right? The issue where we have been discussing the general solution for ConnectionManager already includes reference for it: https://github.com/libp2p/js-libp2p/issues/744

#### Dependencies/prerequisites
<!--List any other projects that are dependencies/prerequisites for this project that is being pitched.-->

#### Future opportunities
<!--What future projects/opportunities could this project enable?-->

> - Propose a spec for JS, that can also be implemented in Go

Author: Talking with @Stebalien last week, this also needs improvements in GO. Having as a result of this solution design a spec would be super helpful
